

#Beyond Interfaces

Interfaces are surfaces or boundaries at which two independent systems connect and interact. The term is used in biology for the common boundary between living beings and their environment (such as the skin), in chemistry for the boundary between two different phases of matter (such as an insoluble solid and a liquid), and in social science for the areas or points where two or more social groups connect.[@interface_2015] Most commonly though, the term is used in computing, referring to the boundary through which two separate components of a computer system exchange information. One such boundary is the user-interface, through which interactions between humans and machines occur, and which will be the focal point of this section.

<span class="software technology artifacts">The world is increasingly permeated by software. It is in traffic-control systems, cashier desks, ATM kiosks, cars, trains, airplanes, microwaves, washing machines, medical equipment, fitness trackers,  watches, cameras, phones, servers, personal computers. It would almost be easier to compile a list of places and objects where software cannot be found. Increasingly many forms of human activities are mediated by it.</span>

<span class="software">Despite its proliferation, the meaning of software is challenging to define. According to Wikipedia, it is *any set of instructions that directs a computer to perform specific operations.* [@software_2016] It is interesting to note that software is widely considered as being separate from hardware: an immaterial layer on top of it. Friedrich Kittler argued differently: "there is no software" because all computing operations ultimately come down to *signifiers of voltage differences* [@therenosoftware_friedrichkittler_1992].</span>

<span class="software tool representation interfaces">Software can be likened to language: it can be thought of as a system of representing and manipulating symbols. It is the tool to represent the voltage differences mentioned by Kittler, that is: hardware operations. At the lowest level of representation there is a direct correspondence between software and the architecture of the hardware it controls. Such representations are written in low-level, so-called assembly languages, where constructs of the programming language directly denote specific actions of the underlying hardware. In the early days of computing,  programs were written as direct instructions to the machine in assembly languages. Later, high-level programming languages were designed to abstract these operations. They allow the writing of human readable code that is automatically translated to machine code by the processes of compiling or interpretation. By separating instructions from the machine, they make hardware invisible.</span>
<span class="stack interfaces abstraction software">Software is mounted on top of hardware as a stack.
In-between the layers of the stack are interfaces that abstract the details of the underlying layer. The higher a piece of software is located within the stack, the higher the abstraction it provides from the machine. The highest level of abstraction is the graphical user interface.</span>

Through the example of a mouse-click fired upon a button within a web-interface, I would like to demonstrate the complexity that is abstracted by the user interface. When a mouse button is clicked, the mechanical switch behind the button closes an electrical circuit. An electric signal is sent through a wire to the computer's *Universal Serial Bus (USB)*[@usb_2016] outlet, which connects to the USB Controller on the computer's motherboard. The USB Controller generates a so-called *interrupt-request*,[@interrupt_2015] an alert to the processor to a high-priority condition that needs immediate processing. The processor suspends all its current activities, saves its state and executes a function called an *interrupt handler*[@interrupthandler_2015]. "The interrupt handler is part of the operating system. It reads the information associated with the mouse click event from the USB Controller into the computer's main memory, and puts it into the so called *event queue*[@messagequeue_2015] - a messaging-system used for the inter-communication of separate processes - of the operating system." Web-browsers, like most GUI applications employ a programming construct called the *event loop*[@eventloop_2015]. The event loop runs every few milliseconds, over and over again while the application is open, processing incoming events from the operating system's event queue. The event loop dispatches each event to it's designated event handler implemented by the specific application. In the case of a web-browser, the event handler is a JavaScript (the scripting language used to build dynamic web-pages) function that was registered on the button the click was fired on. This final JavaScript function then executes the functionality attached to the button.

The point of this rather technical discussion is to demonstrate the core function of user interfaces: concealment. They distill the bewildering entanglement of components and instructions into a form that makes sense to the user, and through which one can engage in meaningful interactions with the software one uses. <span class="representation metaphor signification">Buttons, windows, icons, browsers, clicking, surfing, e-mail, the cloud: these are all powerful metaphors that ultimately provide a meaningful face for the underlying binary data and operations our machines work with.</span>

<span class="interfaces agency authorship">The design of interfaces entail a set of decisions about what to hide and what to reveal. These decisions are politically charged, inasmuch as they are based on the designer's intentions to achieve a particular end.</span> Most generally, this is the establishment of meaning in relation to hardware through concealment. The BIOS (Basic Input/Output System) hides details of the hardware, the operating system (OS) hides the BIOS, applications hide the OS, and the graphic user interface hides the application.[@therenosoftware_friedrichkittler_1992] <span class="software hardware interfaces">Hardware itself is meaningless, it is the stack of software mounted on it that gives it purpose, making it able to perform functions we intend it to; and it  are interfaces through which one's intentions are translated into functions of software.</span>

However, through the abstraction of computing processes into familiar metaphors, interfaces also define the space of possibilities in which one's intentions can exist. They define what intentions are actually possible to hold, what processes one can or cannot initiate. By their design, interfaces produce a certain kind of user.

As Wendy Hui Kyong Chun argues,  
*"Software, or perhaps more precisely operating systems, offer us an imaginary relationship to our hardware: they do not represent transistors but rather desktops and recycling bins. Software produces “users.” Without OS there would be no access to hardware; without OS no actions, no practices, and thus no user."*[@softwarepersistencevisual_chun_2004]

Interfaces define users' relationships to the things they connect them to. By showing and hiding, by framing the system they are attached to in a specific way, they enable certain perceptions and actions while eliminating others. It is through this mechanism that the *like* button of Facebook transforms one's notion of value and the *profile* changes one's notions of social relationships.

Thereby, interfaces are not mere surfaces, mediating information and computing functions, but productive forces, or as Alexander Galloway puts it, *"An interface is not a thing, an inter­face is always an effect. It is always a process or a translation."*[@interfaceeffect_galloway_2012]

<span class="tools role-of-designer paradigm-shift disruption">The introduction of personal computers and desktop publishing software with graphical user interfaces during the 1980's had far reaching consequences for the discipline of graphic design. Many forms of work that graphic design was dependent upon and which formerly required specialized skills could now be done on a PC. Authoring software freed graphic designers from having to rely on the work of production artists, photomechanical technicians, key-liners, paste-up artists, typesetters, color separators, and even some printers. [@toolpostproductiongraphic_blauvelt_2011, 23]</span>
It did so by encoding the procedures involved in these crafts into computational processes, and remediating them through a user interface. Now that the user interface democratized the access to design tools and anyone with a computer and the right software packages could practice graphic design, the field had to redefine itself to protect its relevance. <span class="authorship interfaces">A direct consequence of this is that increasingly, graphic designers defined themselves as authors. However, if production of design was now mediated by user interfaces, and if we recognize their productive effect on users', the notion of authorship has to be reconsidered.</span> Lev Manovich argues that "*We can say that all authorship that uses electronic and computer tools is a collaboration between the author and these tools that make possible certain creative operations and certain ways of thinking while discouraging others. Of course humans have designed these tools, so it would be more precise to say that the author who uses electronic / software tools engages in dialog with the software designers."*[@whoauthorsamplingremixingopen_manovich_2002] <span class="agency tools media">Designers not only produce through software, but - in a dialogical relationship with the engineers who created that software - they are also being produced by it.</span>

<span class="media tools production centralization autonomy">Generally speaking, graphic design has so far only taken advantage of the possibilities offered by computers by relying on its remediation of old media through interfaces.  Almost all production work is done through the tools sold by a single company that dominates the market, Adobe. This is a condition that counters the fields' aspirations to seek autonomy. Moreover, the most widely used Adobe programs are primarily aimed at producing fixed graphic documents, particularly for print.</span>

<span class="communication-channels paradigm-shift systems artifacts interfaces">As networked media have become the dominant modes of communication, pushing print into a complementary role and as design is entering the paradigm of relational design, where designers are re-casted as designers of dynamic systems instead of fixed artifacts, graphic designers needs to go beyond the limitations of the user interface.</span>

During the 80's and 90's this might have been too great of a leap for practitioners of a field that is primarily occupied with "right-brain", creative work.  High level programming and scripting languages such as Java, Python and JavaScript started to emerge during the 90's, but they were not particularly well suited yet for artistic and design purposes. Tools that would ease the learning curve and make efficient applications of these languages to the design process  had not been developed until the 2000's.

One such tool, Processing was released in 2001.
*Processing is a flexible software sketchbook and a language for learning how to code within the context of the visual arts.* [@processingorg] It was initiated by Casey Reas and Benjamin Fry at MIT Media Lab with the purposes of *promoting software literacy within the visual arts and visual literacy within technology.*[@processingorg] <span class="programming interfaces tools">Processing is both a programming language and a development environment built in Java. Being a high-level language it greatly reduces the amount of knowledge and time needed to produce visual material by the means of code. It is one of the easiest entry points for visual artists and designers to go beyond the confines of the user interface.</span> Although Processing has a GUI of its own - its integrated development environment (IDE)[@integrateddevelopmentenvironment_2015], it is not an interface attached to a set of predefined functionalities such as the case with Adobe authoring software, it is a tool to create new tools.

Learning tools such as Processing is of paramount importance in today's landscape of information as a significant proportion of the information produced today can only become accessible through the use of customized tools. <span class="data">In 2013, the Norwegian research organization SINTEF[@sintefno] claimed that 90% of the world's data up until that point was generated over the course of the two preceding years.[@bigdatabetter]</span> As the amount of data being produced is on an accelerating rise, this percentage must be even higher today. Most of this data is in a raw form, that is, it has not been subjected to any kind of processing. As such, it is meaningless. One of the greatest challenges of graphic design today can be to give visual form to the sea of unprocessed data and to express the stories that are hidden within them. This is not possible with the use of the ready-made authoring tools that are predominantly being used in the production of graphic design today.

Graphic designer Richard Vijgen's practice is preoccupied with this exact challenge. He *"investigate[s] new strategies to find the big stories in big data through research and design.*"[@richardvijgen] One of his projects, The Deleted City[@deletedcity20]  - written in Processing - is a fitting example of how graphic design can cross the threshold of the interface and in fact, create one of its own in order to extract stories hidden in raw data.
<span class"network web">The project is an interactive visualization of GeoCities, the first large-scale social network that emerged on the internet. GeoCities was a free web-hosting provider modeled after the concept of the 'city', where amateur internet enthusiasts could host their own *home-pages* and share information about themselves and the topics they were interested in. When in 1999 it was acquired by Yahoo! it was the third most visited website on the internet.[@yahoogeocities_2015]</span> Over the course of the 2000's, as other social networks such as MySpace and Facebook gained popularity, GeoCities had lost most of its users and in 2009, Yahoo! decided to shut the website down. At this point it contained at least 38 million user-built pages. A group of digital archivist, the Archive Team whose mission is to save valuable websites and data from being lost, created a complete backup of GeoCities, amounting to 650 gigabytes of data. Richard Vijgen's project is essentially an interface that allows one to browse this archive.  

Such a project would not be conceivable without writing custom software. Each step, from the parsing and ordering of the dataset to the design of its visualization and interactivity requires code that is written specifically for it.

<span class="conclusion">Understanding the limitations and powers of interfaces is of great importance to graphic design.
As graphic design is becoming an autonomous discipline, with its practitioners increasingly seeking autonomy and social agency, a deep understanding of interfaces is critical, as interfaces are not merely surfaces where mediation of information and computer functions occur, but sites at which specific user sentiments are produced.
Graphic design has predominantly been in a rather passive position in relation to interfaces, primarily relying on its remediation of old media. As digital media is becoming the dominant channel of information, contemporary designers need to reconsider their position towards interfaces and engage in not only using but also producing them.<span>
