



#Politics of Code

In October 2008, a person named Satoshi Nakamoto released a paper titled "*Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System*"[@bitcoinpeertopeerelectronic_nakamoto_2008] on an online cryptographic forum. Combining existing peer-to-peer technologies and cryptographic techniques, he outlined a protocol for a decentralized cryptocurrency which he named Bitcoin. Bitcoin is based on a distributed database or ledger called the block chain.  Transactions on the block chain can be sent anonymously in a peer-to-peer fashion, without the use of intermediaries such as banks, funds or credit card and insurance companies. The identity of Nakamoto has not been yet uncovered, but his invention is continuing to gain widespread adoption.

The key innovation of the Bitcoin protocol is the block chain, its public, shared ledger. This ledger is essentially a distributed database containing all the transactions that have ever been made with the currency and is open to all nodes that participate in the network of the Bitcoin protocol. In practice, the ledger is maintained by special nodes called *miners* who collectively keep the ledger up to date. Miners validate transactions through a mechanism that involves solving a computationally expensive mathematical puzzle, and in return they receive newly generated Bitcoins. The system is programmed in a way that only 21 million Bitcoins can ever be mined; according to an estimate, all Bitcoins will have been mined by the year 2140. Newly validated transactions form a block, which are then appended to the chain of previous blocks. Once a transaction has been added, it cannot be easily modified or deleted, since that would require the regeneration of all the blocks that came after it. The block chain is a ledger that anyone can add to, but no one can remove from. A core innovation of the block chain system is "*trustless trust*", meaning that participants do not need to know or trust each other in order to participate in the exchange of values; trust is effectively guaranteed by the block chain mechanism.

All of this might sound like geeky experiment, but Bitcoin has actually been gaining momentum. The currency has gone through a number of speculative bubbles throughout its history, but its adoption is continuing to grow. During 2015 the number of companies trying out Bitcoin has risen fourteen-fold. The number of Bitcoin wallets, Bitcoin-ATMs and merchants' annual revenue doubled. The sum of venture capital investments made in Bitcoin has doubled. The number of Bitcoin start-ups has tripled. [@statebitcoinblockchain_coindesk] The amount of investment pouring into Bitcoin is comparable to that of the early internet. [@bitlicenseimposeshigh_coindesk]

What are the driving forces behind Bitcoin's adoption? It is no coincidence that the beginning of Bitcoin coincided with the financial crisis of 2008. bitcoin.org was registered in August 2008, and Nakamoto released his paper on a cryptography mailing list shortly after. [@futuresblockchain_noran.khan] When the first block called the *'genesis-block'* was mined, Nakamoto included this line of text with the data: *“The Times 03/Jan/2009 Chancellor on brink of second bailout for banks.”*.[@bitcoinboom_bustillos_2013]

Besides providing the possibility of making peer-to-peer anonymized transactions without having to rely on banks and credit card companies that would charge transaction fees on them, Bitcoin is also independent of state regulation. During the Cyprus financial crisis broke of 2013, the European Union together with the International Monetary Fund and the European Central Bank pushed President Nicos Anastasiades into going through with a plan which would have included the confiscation of money from every single bank account in Cyprus. Eventually, the plan was rejected by the parliament, but the drama had appeared to have caused a significant increase in the value of Bitcoin.[@bitcoinboom_bustillos_2013] Indirect evidence suggested that Spaniards had taken interest in the currency - seeing the events in Cyprus as what could potentially happen to them next. Google searches from Spain for the term 'bitcoin' had spiked, as well as the number of downloads of Bitcoin apps. [@jitteryspaniardsseek_bernhardwarner]

People's preference of an unstable and experimental currency over their banks  reveals the level of distrust in banks that the financial crisis resulted in. In a world where much of the power is controlled by tightly knit network of corporations [@networkglobalcorporate_vitali_2011], there is a desperate need for the decentralization that Bitcoin and the blockchain promise.
Will these technologies be used to that end?

In the early days of Bitcoin, anybody could run mining software on their PCs. As the number of miners grew, rising competition caused the appearance of specialized equipment - customized integrated circuits (ASICs)[@asicbitcoinwiki] manufactured for the sole purpose of mining Bitcoins  - and centralized structures of mining in the form of mining-farms (large computing powerhouses consisting of thousands of computers) and pools (aggregate structures of multiple mining nodes). Today, the barrier of entry is unreachable for most people; the only profitable way of participating in the network is by setting up mining farms of significant size, costing hundreds of thousands of dollars to setup and operate. [@fewknownbitcoin_swanson]

One of the most important innovations of the Bitcoin protocol is its decentralized consensus mechanism - that the miners that validate transactions are decentralized nodes in the system. There can be no single entity that holds more than 50% of the computing power of the network. That is a necessary condition for the system's resistance to censorship and manipulation, and if not met, the majority shareholder can block or reverse transactions at their will. [@miningpoolcentralization_buterin] Over the course of 2014, the popular mining pool [GHash.io](https://ghash.io/) exceeded the 50% threshold multiple times, meaning they were in a position to manipulate the consensus mechanism, and the only thing preventing them from doing so was their benevolence. One of the core innovations of Bitcoin and the block chain mechanism was the elimination of the question of trust by the means of decentralized consensus - that trust is guaranteed by the infrastructure. The controversy of GHash.io  and the rise of mining pools reintroduced this problem, eroding the original promises of the system.

The increasing centralization of the Bitcoin network and the growing attention and investment it continues to receive have generated debates within the Bitcoin community about its future scalability and development. A common characteristic of these debates is that they revolve around technical issues: changing the block-size, changing the transaction-verification algorithms[@proofworkbitcoin], or even changing some of Bitcoin's core design principles.
The different proposals put forth within these debates would lead to the emergence of very different economic and social structures on the platform. Putting aside the technical meanings of these proposals, let's take a look at what social effects they would entail. Increasing the block-size, would enable further centralization, because it would require more computing power to mine a block, but it would also allow more transactions to be processed per second, thus allowing for more users to join the network.[@blocksizelimit] Implementing the 'Two Phase Proof of Work (2P-PoW)' would disincentivize large mining pools and farms by introducing a special, second cryptographic puzzle that would alter the consensus mechanism in a way such that it would force mining pools to have to make unprofitable investments in mining hardware. [@howdisincentivizelarge; @promisesasidetheres] Partly sacrificing one of Bitcoin's core design principles - the anonymity of nodes - and injecting a dose of identity into the system could mitigate the problem of mining power centralization.[@bitcoinnodesvs_jamesdangelo]

These problems surrounding the future of the platform highlight the political dimensions of software. Essentially, the issues of centralization and scalability, as well as their potential resolutions are problems that can be and will need to be found within the source code of Bitcoin. The development of Bitcoin takes place in a public repository on the collaborative coding platform [Github](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin). In theory, anybody can contribute to its development by submitting changes to the code. In practice, any change will be either accepted or rejected by a team of core developers, that maintain the repository. The future of Bitcoin and the economic and social structures it will enable will ultimately be determined by the decisions of those individuals.

So far, this rather detailed survey of the history and significance of Bitcoin has not touched upon the question of design. From a design perspective, the most immediately relevant aspect of the platform is how the design of its architecture lead to specific social and economic structures that emerge as a result of it. Although this design is not visual, it produces a certain kind of relational aesthetic, as the design determines the social relations between its participants.
The story of Bitcoin embodies one of the most significant developments of our times: the entanglement of social and computational processes.
The architecture of software conditions the architecture of social organization. [Benjamin Bratton]()'s theory of The Stack[@stacksoftwaresovereignty_bratton_2015] is a helpful model to understand the consequences of this. Borrowing from the TCP/IP - OSI[@internetprotocolsuite_2015] model of communication protocols he describes current and future societies as being part of stack-like hardware-software system.

In a [discussion](http://mthvn.tumblr.com/post/38098461078/thecloudthestateandthestack) about The Stack with [Metahaven](http://mthvn.tumblr.com/post/38098461078/thecloudthestateandthestack) he says:

> Right now the geopolitics of the Cloud are defined by a clash between State and non-State organizations [...] with decentralized networks in between. In the coming years, the geopolitics of the Cloud will be defined by the tension and conversion of States and Clouds into one another: States becoming Cloud-based platforms, and Cloud-based platforms taking on more and more practical forms of sovereignty—identity, geography, mobility. So a Cloud Polis, we might imagine, would represent other weird kinds of “sovereign” software/State platforms that are probably not bound to specific spots of territory in the same way as the Westphalian nation-state was. They might be more effective and democratic, or more totalitarian, more or less elective than the models we have now.

<!-- ### conclusion{.core-statement .agency} -->
As graphic design is on a mission to become an autonomous discipline, and as its practitioners continue to seek social and political agency, it is necessary for the field to develop a branch that is literate in the language of future politics: code.
As social processes have become indissociable from computational processes, it is imperative for the understanding of contemporary society to be able to read, write and critique code. Today's problems can only be sufficiently represented through today's medium: software.
