

# 3. Designer as agent

<span class="design-practice authorship post-modernism tools agency">Designer as author, citizen, cultural critic, activist. Moving away from the notion of design as commercial service, current thinking on design is trending towards redefining the role of the designer as an independent social agent, who brings critical issues of contemporary society into view. The designer is not waiting anymore for the phone call or e-mail of a potential commissioner, s/he takes an active role in both the initiation and production of projects. And projects, that are not aimed at the manufacture of desires for the latest consumer products, but at amplifying positive social forces that are in line with the designer's own values or exposing the shortcomings of dominant modes of thinking. These relatively new ideas about the designer's identity can be traced back to the 1980's, when the field of design was disrupted both by the proliferation of post-modernist thought and the introduction of the personal computer as the primary design tool.</span>

<span class="post-modernism agency">The concept of post-modernism has different interpretations. Some scholars see it as a description of style: *"a rejection of the traditional visual forms of modernism"* [@graphicdesigntheory_davis_2012], while for others, such as Frederic Jameson, *"it is also a periodizing concept whose function is to correlate the emergence of new formal features in culture with the emergence of a new type of social life and a new economic order - what is often euphemistically called modernization, postindustrial or consumer society, the society of the media or the spectacle, or multinational capitalism."* [@postmodernismconsumersociety_jameson_1985]
However, for the purposes of finding out how the notion of "designer as social agent" emerged, finding an exact description of post-modernism is not so important; rather, an understanding of the sentiments it brought about may be more helpful: disappointment, cynicism, disenchantment. These sentiments, of course are strongly related to the new social order of the consumer society, to the increasing media saturation and to the expansion of multinational capitalism that Jameson is describing.</span>

<span class="frame-of-representation image">Modernist graphic design was concerned with the pursuit of universality by *"an objective attitude in the presentation of the subject."*[@josefmullerbrockmanndesigner_muller-brockmann_1995] With the global expansion of capitalism and the ever increasing commodification of all aspects of life, this view could no longer be justified. As multinational companies increasingly invested in the creation of attractive brand-identities graphic design's role in supporting these developments became evident. In his book, the Society of the Spectacle, Guy Debord has powerfully expressed the importance of images in supporting the commodification of life: *"The present stage, in which social life has become completely dominated by the accumulated productions of the economy, is bringing about a general shift from having to appearing — all “having” must now derive its immediate prestige and its ultimate purpose from appearances."*[@societyspectacle_debord_2010]</span>

<span class="frame-of-representation agency">The realization that graphic artifacts and representation always frame the world in specific ways resulted in the disillusionment with principles of modernism and ignited a rebellion against them, both in the stylistic aspects of design, and in graphic designers' seeking for greater autonomy. A growing awareness had started to develop within the field, that graphic artifacts are always in support of specific outlooks, and as such, graphic design is a major form of cultural and social production. A new, critical sensibility has gained foothold in the consciousness of graphic designers and many of them shifted their efforts towards greater social awareness.</span>

<span class="tools software design-practice agency">The proliferation of personal computers during the 1980's and the introduction of desktop publishing software, access to design tools had opened to everyone. Now that anybody who had a computer could practice graphic design, it became even more urgent to contribute more than technical production skills. As a result, the role of designers as cultural agents had intensified.</span>

This is illustrated by the discourse on the question of authorship and agency of designers that continued in the 90's. Rick Poynor's article 'Designer as Author' published in 1991 in the UK magazine Blueprint, contemplated how the typographic work of Neville Brody and Jonathan Barnbrook went beyond the mere representation of a client's message.[@designerauthor_rickpoynor_1991] In 1996  Michael Rock wrote an essay with the same title for Eye magazine, arguing that it is a feeling of insecurity over the value of graphic designers' work that fuels the preference of originating content versus only giving form to content.[@eyemagazine_michaelrock_1996] In 2005, Michael Rock came back with 'Fuck Content', published in Multiple Signatures, in which he re-framed the visual treatment of content as being *"a kind of text itself, equal to, and as complex and referential as traditional forms of content"*.[@fuckcontent_rock_2013] In his 2006 contribution to the discussion entitled 'Research and Destroy', Daniel van der Velden (Metahaven) argued that *"today, an important graphic design is one generated by the designer himself, a commentary in the margins of visual culture"*.[@researchdestroydesign_danielvandervelden_2011] In his 2007 essay 'Designers and Dilettantes', published on Design Observer, Dmitry Siegel asked the question 'If the designer is author, what becomes of the designer as designer?' and put forward the argument that designers can better utilize their agency and have an impact in the commercial arena.[@designersdilettantesdesign_dmitrisiegel]

It is now 2016 and discussions on the social agency of graphic designers is still a topic of discussion. At this point I feel that it useful to take a step backwards and try to clarify what the notion of agency really means and what relation it has to  authorship.

<span class="agency power">In my interpretation, agency means the capacity to engage in actions towards specific goals or in other words, the ability to bring about changes and consequences in the world at large. As such, agency is a notion synonymous with the notion of power. The materialization of one's agency is the exercise of one's power.</span>

<span class="rhetoric agency artifact meaning">If agency is the *capacity to exert power* then authorship is a specific role in which this capacity can be utilized; it is a *form of exerting power*.
It is a role through which the the capacity of shaping people's minds can be utilized by asserting arguments through speech, writing or other communicative artifacts. Authors construct meaning through communicative actions or artifacts in the hope of exerting influence on the thoughts, beliefs and attitudes held by the recipients of the their work, thereby reshaping the recipients' relationship to the matter at hand and subsequently their courses of action. Constructed meaning can be mediated to the recipients by different artifacts, each of which possess specific affordances to persuasion. It is different to make arguments in speech, writing, images, moving images, graphics, typography or any combinations of these.</span>

<span class="question">How might we construct compelling arguments about our contemporary world?</span> <span class="question">What rhetoric devices can we employ to effectively represent the current state of affairs?</span> Before I attempt to answer these questions, I will move on to explore the concept of the *Network Society* and the extent to which software functions as a cultural frame and instrument of power.
