
#Abstract


A new paradigm has started to emerge in the field of graphic design; a transformation of the set of techniques, values and methods that characterize its practice has been set in motion.

Traditionally, the practice of a graphic designer revolved around the formal arrangement of graphic elements into artifacts that mediated messages of commissioners. The three key aspects characterizing the profession have been 1) its position as a *service* within a *client/designer* relationship, 2) that it has been predominantly occupied with the *development of form*, and 3) that the products of the design process have been *specific artifacts*. In recent years, new models of practices have started to emerge within the field, seriously challenging these three aspects that once defined the role and identity of the graphic designer.

The developments in the field of graphic design are enveloped by a larger cultural shift driven by information technologies. Throughout history, forms of social organization were always tightly related to the ways in which information was produced, distributed and consumed. The invention of the movable type in the 15th century had unleashed a historical process that brought with it revolutions in political and scientific thinking, and eventually gave rise to the philosophical movement of the Enlightenment, the scientific and industrial revolution, market economies and democratic nation states.

Today we are witnessing a similar shift, empowered by networked information / communication technologies. Since its wide-scale adoption, the internet has reconfigured many different aspects of society, from  economies to political organization, to social interaction, to production and distribution of knowledge. As the age of movable type and printing fostered a certain kind of thinking - mechanical, linear, object-centered - so does the age of the internet facilitate its own specific mentalities - evolutionary, interconnected, system-oriented. These changes exert a gravitational pull on the field of design, whereby the role of designers is being re-casted into that of initiators and facilitators of dynamic systems and platforms, rather than producers of physical artifacts.

While the introduction of computers into the design process in the mid-1980's has rearranged the ways in which design was produced and distributed, it has not yet brought a significant change to the ways the process of design is thought about. Although desktop publishing software, with its remediation of old tools and media through the graphical user interface allowed designers to exercise greater control over their production, the potential of computers - as tools to create new tools - has not yet been fully embraced by the discipline.

As graphic design is maturing into an autonomous discipline with its practitioners increasingly seeking social and political agency, in light of the growing entanglement of social and computing systems and the proliferation of software in all aspects of life, the discipline is challenged to develop new values, skills, and practices to ground itself in the technological turmoils of the 21st century.
