
#Agency

Designer as author, citizen, cultural critic, activist. Moving away from the notion of design as commercial service, current thinking on design is trending towards defining the role of the designer as an independent social agent, who brings critical issues of contemporary society into view. The designer is not waiting anymore for the phone call or e-mail of a potential commissioner, s/he takes an active role in both the initiation and production of projects. And projects, that are not aimed at the manufacture of desires for the latest consumer products, but at amplifying positive social forces that are in line with the designer's own values. These relatively new ideas about the designer's identity can be traced back to the 1980's, when the field of design was disrupted both by the proliferation of post-modernist thought and the introduction of the personal computer as the primary design tool.  

The concept of post-modernism has different interpretations. Some scholars see it as a description of style: *"a rejection of the traditional visual forms of modernism"* [@graphicdesigntheory_davis_2012], while for others, such as Frederic Jameson, *"it is also a periodizing concept whose function is to correlate the emergence of new formal features in culture with the emergence of a new type of social life and a new economic order - what is often euphemistically called modernization, postindustrial or consumer society, the society of the media or the spectacle, or multinational capitalism."* [@postmodernismconsumersociety_jameson_1985-1]
However, for the purposes of finding out how the notion of "designer as social agent" emerged, finding an exact description of post-modernism is not so important; rather, an understanding of the sentiments it brought about may be more helpful: disappointment, cynicism, disenchantment. These sentiments, of course are strongly related to the new social order of the consumer society, to the increasing media saturation and to the expansion of multinational capitalism that Jameson is describing.

Modernist graphic design was concerned with the pursuit of universality by *"an objective attitude in the presentation of the subject."*[@josefmullerbrockmanndesigner_muller-brockmann_1995] With the global expansion of capitalism and the ever increasing commodification of all aspects of life, this view could no longer be justified. As multinational companies increasingly invested in the creation of attractive brand-identities graphic design's role in supporting these developments became evident.
In his book, the Society of the Spectacle, Guy Debord has powerfully expressed the importance of images in supporting the commodification of life: *"The present stage, in which social life has become completely dominated by the accumulated productions of the economy, is bringing about a general shift from having to appearing — all “having” must now derive its immediate prestige and its ultimate purpose from appearances."*[@societyspectacle_debord_2010]

The realization that graphic artifacts and representation always frame the world in specific ways resulted in the disillusionment with principles of modernism and ignited a rebellion against them, both in the stylistic aspects of design, and in graphic designers' seeking for greater autonomy. A growing awareness had started to develop within the field, that graphic artifacts are always in support of specific outlooks, and as such, graphic design is a major form of cultural and social production. A new, critical sensibility has gained foothold in the consciousness of graphic designers and many of them shifted their efforts towards greater social responsibility.

The proliferation of personal computers during the 1980's and the introduction of desktop publishing software, access to design tools had been democratized. Now that anybody who had a computer could practice graphic design, it became even more urgent to contribute more than technical production skills. As a result, the role of designers as cultural agents had intensified.

This is illustrated by the discourse on the question of authorship and agency of designers that continued in the 90's. Rick Poynor's article 'Designer as Author' published in 1991 in the UK magazine Blueprint, contemplated how the typographic work of Neville Brody and Jonathan Barnbrook went beyond the mere representation of a client's message.[@designerauthor_rickpoynor_1991] In 1996  Michael Rock wrote an essay with the same title for Eye magazine, arguing that it is a feeling of insecurity over the value of graphic designers' work that fuels the preference of originating content versus only giving form to content.[@eyemagazine_michaelrock_1996] In 2005, Michael Rock came back with 'Fuck Content', published in Multiple Signatures, in which he re-framed the visual treatment of content as being *"a kind of text itself, equal to, and as complex and referential as traditional forms of content"*.[@fuckcontent_rock_2013] In his 2006 contribution to the discussion entitled 'Research and Destroy', Daniel van der Velden (Metahaven) argued that *"today, an important graphic design is one generated by the designer himself, a commentary in the margins of visual culture"*.[@researchdestroydesign_danielvandervelden_2011] In his 2007 essay 'Designers and Dilettantes', published on Design Observer, Dmitry Siegel asked the question 'If the designer is author, what becomes of the designer as designer?' and put forward the argument that designers can better utilize their agency and have an impact in the commercial arena.[@designersdilettantesdesign_dmitrisiegel]


Within this discourse, the notion of cultural agency is linked with that of authorship. The discussion revolves around whether designers should seek out influence in the origination or in the design of content. I would like to take a different approach and examine the issue in terms of the relationship between works of communication and their recipients, and argue that agency need not necessarily be sought in the role of an author.

While post-modernism gave birth to the notion of the designer-as-author it had also killed it right away.
One of the main ideas that post-modernism brought forth is that truth is plural; there is no Truth, but there are multiple truths. Roland Barthes wrote that
*"a text consists of multiple writings, issuing from several cultures and entering into dialogue with each other, into parody, into contestation; but there is one place where this multiplicity is collected, united, and this place is not the author, as we have hitherto said it was, but the reader: the reader is the very space in which are inscribed, without any being lost, all the citations a writing consists of; the unity of a text is not in its origin, it is in its destination"* and proclaimed "The Death of the Author". Any work of communication is always subject to the interpretation of the recipient of that work and this interpretation is always bound by the social and historical context the recipient is embedded in. The truth of a work is unstable: many interpretations of it are possible and these interpretations change over time.


While acknowledging the fact that the audience of a work is always free to interpret that work in any way they want, the traditional, object-centered definition of design practice does not lend itself very well to the expression of plural truths. The configuration of specific content within a fixed artifact is embedded in a linear model of communication, whereby the designer encodes his/her message and channels it to the receivers through the medium.[@modelscommunication_2015] This model of communication does not allow the receiver to take part in the creation of truth, beyond the possibility of projecting his/her own meaning on the artifact through which the message was transmitted. The designer and receiver stand in an unequal relationship within this model. Authorship in this context is a placeholder of authority.


If it is agency, rather than authority that designers are after, the artifact oriented design practice needs to shift to a system oriented practice, whereby the designer takes on the role of a *facilitator*, rather than an *author*. This model is about designing participatory platforms and procedures rather than products. It is about representing knowledge as a space of possibilities, rather than particular things. Within this model, communication is dialogical, rather than linear; development is bottom-up, rather than top-down; outcomes are emergent, rather than planned.
