Designer as author
--

Moving away from the notion of design as service, current thinking on design is trending towards defining the role of the designer as an active and independent agent, who brings critical socio-political issues into the foreground, or even attempts to provide solutions to them. The designer is not waiting anymore for the phone call or e-mail of a potential commissioner, s/he takes an active role in both the initiation and production of a project. The common agenda of these approaches to design is essentially to challenge the status quo, to change conventional perceptions and subsequently, the way things work in society.

Graphic designers often use terms to describe their work such as self-authored, self-generated and self-initiated. In the last 15 years, there have been an active discussion about the role of graphic designers as authors. This discussion might have started with Rick Poynor's article 'Designer as Author' published in 1991 in the UK magazine Blueprint, contemplating how the typographic work of Neville Brody and Jonathan Barnbrook went beyond the mere representation of a client's message.[1] In 1996  Michael Rock wrote an essay with the same title for Eye magazine, arguing that it is a feeling of insecurity over the value of graphic designers' work that fuels the preference of originating content versus only giving form to content.[2] In 2005, Michael Rock came back with 'Fuck Content', published in Multiple Signatures, in which he re-framed the visual treatment of content as being "a kind of text itself, equal to, and as complex and referential as traditional forms of content".[3] In his 2006 contribution to the discussion entitled 'Research and Destroy', Daniel van der Velden (Metahaven), argued that "today, an important graphic design is one generated by the designer himself, a commentary in the margins of visual culture".[4] In his 2007 essay 'Designers and Dilettantes', published on Design Observer, Dmiry Siegel asks the question 'If the designer is author, what becomes of the designer as designer?' and puts forward the argument that designers can better utilize their agency and have an impact in the commercial arena.[5]
Authorship is often discussed in terms of the relationship between author, text and audience. To think about authorship is to think about the origin of a certain meaning (author), which is delivered through some medium (text) to an audience. For example, Foucault sees the author as the embodiment of certain discourses that happen in society.[6] The author is a convergence point through which ideas manifest themselves in a perceivable form.

I see authorship as a capacity to create things that will exert a certain kind of influence on the world. It is the position from which one is able to inscribe one's mark onto the world, to change the world's shape from what it was before. Graphic design's way of doing this is by changing previously held ideas and perspectives by which the world was perceived before. Authorship is the agency to produce artifacts or to facilitate experiences that reorient the ways in which people think and act.


To be an author one has to possess literacy. Literacy is the ability to read and to write. The ability of reading is the ability to decode symbols in order to derive meaning from them, while the ability of writing is the ability to encode meaning into symbols that can mediate this meaning to others. Traditionally reading and writing are thought of in terms of reading and writing texts (string of symbols encoding meaning through language), but the notion of literacy can be abstracted and seen as the ability of deriving and creating meaning. These are not exclusive to the act of reading and writing of texts but also apply to other forms of communication.

In the middle ages literacy was a privilege of the ruling classes of society: the nobility and the church. It was both a privilige of these ruling classes and an instrument through which power could be maintained. The democratization of literacy is closely related to the abolishment of the medieval structure of society, since knowledge was not confined to an elite class. Power started to be dispersed throughout ever greater stratas of society.
It could be hardly disputed that today, technology plays a central role in our lives. Increasingly our practices are mediated through software. There is software in our microwaves, washing machines, cars, trains, airplanes, medical equipment, mobile phones, traffic lights. Software is everywhere and its influence is undisputable. Yet the ability to read and to write software is not  widespread. Most of us are only passive consumers of tools and technologies that tech corporate giants such as Apple, Microsoft, Google, Facebook or Adobe offer us. What does this mean in terms of our abilities to become authors? What does authorship mean in the age of ubiquitous software? I would like to argue, that the ability to communicate with machines is the literacy of the 21st century, and that to become authors, we must become literate in the languages of our technological world.


Future authors of the world will be the lawyer-politician-designer hybrids that write and deploy procedures and smart-contracts on the Ethereum block-chain.
