
Interfaces
--

Interfaces are surfaces or boundaries at which two independent systems connect and interact. The term is used in biology for the common boundary between living beings and their environment (such as the skin), in chemistry for the boundry between two different phases of matter (such as an insoluble solid and a liquid) [1], and in social science for the areas or points where social friction can occur between groups, due to unequal distribution of values, interests, knowledges and power.[2] Most commonly though, the term interface is used in computing, referring to the boundary through which two seperate components of a computer system exchange information.[3] One such boundary is the user-interface, through which interactions between humans and machines occur, and which will be the focal point of this text.

Most of the things we do today happen through the mediation of software.
However, pieces of software are incredibly complex things, often consisting of hundreds or thousands of various components, that work together to attain a certain result.
For example let's take a look at what happens when you click a button in your browser, using a mouse that is connected to your computer via usb. First, there is a piece of hardware in your mouse that is able to register when you click a mouse key. When you click a mouse key a closed circuit is formed in this piece of hardware and an electric signal is generated, that this hardware forwards to another piece of hardware in your computer called the 'usb-bus'. This event generates a signal called an 'interrupt', which indicates to the processor of your computer that there is an event that needs to be processed immediately. The processor then suspends everything it was currently doing, saves its state and executes a function called an interrupt handler. The interrupt handler is a piece of software component in your operating system that reads the information associated with the mouse click event into your computer's memory, by putting it into the so called 'event queue'. Web-browsers, like most other applications are built on a so called 'event loop', a software component that is executed every few milliseconds, over and over again while the application is open, and it is this event-loop that is continously checking whether there is a new event in the queue that needs to be responded to. Once the event loop comes across an event in the queue, it translates it to the language of yet another breed of event handlers that live inside your application. In the case of a web-browser, the event is forwarded to a JavaScript (the scripting language used to build dynamic web-pages) event handler that is registered on the button you clicked on. This last event handler on the top is what finally determines what further instructions will be triggered by your clicking the mouse, be it the downloading of a file or 'like'-ing of a post in your Facebook feed.

The point of this rather technical discussion is to demonstrate the complexity that is hidden from us when we interact with computer systems. This is what interfaces do, they distill this jungle of components and instructions into a form that makes sense to us, and through which we can have meaningful interactions with the software we use. Buttons, windows, icons, browsers,clicking, surfing, e-mail, the cloud: these are all powerful metaphors that ultimately provide a meaningful face for the underlying binary data and operations our machines work with.

But there is something that is lost by this reduction: freedom of control. This is most of the times not a bad thing; we don't want to be bothered every time we click the mouse by the technical implementation of how the mouse click signal will be translated into the actions we want our computers to do. But if we have abolutely no insight into to the operations of the programs we use, we are fully at the mercy of the intentions and limitations imposed by the authors of these programs.


It is important to master procedural literacy because while the Gutenberg galaxy was linear and static, the network society is interconnected and procedural.
The graphic designer will be a designer of procedures and procedures are managed through interfaces.
